Role of information and topology in agent-based competitive systems with limited resources

Sandro Mehic, Franco Bagnoli, Università di Firenze

The problem of competition, cooperation and the emergence of collective behaviour in the presence of limited resources is quite general, and one of cornerstones of evolutionary dynamics both in the natural and the in the artificial worlds. These models exhibit complex phenomena, governed by various parameters that describe the quantity and the quality of agents involved. We study how these parameters influence the efficiency of the models, measured as efficient distribution of limited resources, and how the additional information like vicinity, it's structure, the number and the cognitive abilities of participants modify these models efficiency.  We extend the classical prototype of such environment, i.e, minority games, by allowing agents to process additional information.

The problem of competition, cooperation and the emergence of collective behaviour in the presence of limited resources is quite general, and one of cornerstones of evolutionary dynamics both in the natural and  in the artificial worlds. For instance, trading is nowadays mainly performed by algorithms which act autonomously and almost form ecosystem. These models exhibit complex phenomena, governed by various parameters that describe the quantity and the quality of agents involved. We study how these parameters influence the efficiency of the models, measured as efficient distribution of limited resources, and how the additional information like vicinity, it's structure, the number and the cognitive abilities of participants modify these models efficiency. We extend the classical prototype of such environment, i.e, minority games, by allowing agents to process additional information. We analyse how this exchange information affects the dynamics of the system. The main focus is put on the role of the information from each agents vicinity and study the influence of different community structures on the model. We investigate several topologies like simple patch vicinity, von Neumann vicinity, small world, scale-free networks and a hierarchical small world network. We have found that there is a distinct relation between the structure and dimension of the vicinity, ie. the information given to each agent, and the efficiency of the model. These results could be used to optimise any kind of distributed algorithmic ecosystem that has a finite resources and needs an efficient use of it. We further investigate how these finding can be used in algorithmic ecosystems. The context within which we elaborate some of our ideas is high-frequency financial markets, that are run by an enormous number of trading algorithms. Among other possible applications we consider optimizing the routing protocols for Delay Tolerant Networks, more efficient smart-grid energy systems and so on.

Minority games (MG) constitute a simple multi-agent based approach for the simulation of financial markets.
It was first introduced by Challet and Zhang in \cite{challet1997emergence}, and has since evolved in many forms.
Although it has been mainly used to simulate financial markets, with certain modifications this model can be used to simulate other systems
where agents act independently and in their best interest, while the resource for which they are competing is limited.

The model of the minority games is based on the El Farol Bar problem, defined by Brian Arthur in \cite{arthur1994inductive}.
In the El Farol community, every Thursday there is a concert that people would like to attend.
However if more than $60\%$ of the population goes to the bar they will not have fun for it is overcrowded, and a better decision would have been to stay at home.
If less than $60\%$ of the population is present at the bar, then the participants will have a good time, and staying at home is considered a less favourable decision.
Every person has to decide independently, based only on their knowledge of past weeks.
This makes their behaviour inductive, as they can only remember the attendance at the bar for a finite number of weeks.
The agents act in their own best interest and try to predict every week what the attendance will be, and then decide whether to attend or stay at home.
This model is also self-contained as the new information, ie. the attendance at the bar in the current week, is generated by the population itself.

This idea has been modified to simulate financial markets by Challet and Zhang into the first model of minority games \cite{challet1997emergence}.
Mainly the limit for deciding the winning side has been lowered to $50\%$, which makes the winning side the minority one.
The model is defined as a set of $N$ agents, where $N$ is an odd integer.
The population of the agents is involved in a series of repeated games where at each round every agent has to make a choice between two actions.
Each agent makes his decisions based on a set of strategies that are available to him.
When the game starts each agent draws a number $S$ of strategies, from the set of available strategies.
A strategy is defined as a discrete function, $f:2^M\to\{0,1\}$, where $M$ is the \textit{memory} or the \textit{brain size} of each agent.


The sum of all the agent's decisions is called the attendance, denoted as
A(t) and defined as:


A major feature of the MG model are the two distinctive phases which characterize the game with different collective behaviour explained by the agents quantity and cognitive abilities
In the two phases there is clearly different collective behaviour of the agents that can be explained by their quantity and cognitive abilities.

After further studies, Savit, Manuca and Riolo [9] have noted that the macro-
scopic behaviour of the model is not independently characterized by the single
parameters M and N, but rather by the relation between the two. They have
discovered that a new control parameter α, defined as
, determines the
volatility of the model, the volatility being defined as a normalized variance.

The volatility is not influenced by the source of information, meaning
that it maintains it's characteristic behaviour in endogenous and exogenous
games.

[1] Damien Challet and Y-C Zhang. Emergence of cooperation and organization in an evolutionary game. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 246(3):407-418, 1997.
[2] W Brian Arthur.Inductive reasoning and bounded rationality. The American economic review, pages 406-411, 1994.